In this video we'll learn what polymorphism is and how we can help us better develop our Object-Oriented
applications.
Polymorphism is a fundamental part of object oriented programming.
There are several types of polymorphism in C++ and we've already learned about two of them.
When we overloaded functions and when we overloaded operators these are considered forms of compile
time polymorphism.
You might see the terms compile time early binding and static binding these terms all mean the same
thing.
They simply mean before the program executes.
In other words something the compiler takes care of way before the program runs runtime late binding
and dynamic binding all refer to the Association of what the programmer wants to do with how to do it.
But at runtime as the program executes we'll see some examples in a few slides that will make this very
clear.
Polymorphism allows us to think more abstractly when we write programs we can think deposit or print
or draw.
Instead of thinking in specific versions of deposit print and draw so I can simply think deposit a thousand
dollars to this account and I don't have to worry about what kind of county it is.
I'll be sure that the correct deposit function will be called depending on what type of account I have.
And this is all determined at runtime in C++ the default type of binding is static binding.
This makes sense since C++ is all about efficiency and static binding is done before runtime.
So programs can be as fast as possible.
However sometimes we want to defer decisions until runtime in C++ we can opt into this behavior by using
base class pointers or references and declaring our functions as virtual functions.
We'll see the details in syntax of this later in this section.
But first let's look at the types of polymorphism that C++ provides so that we can put this section
in context.
Here's a simple chart that shows the types of polymorphism and C++.
There are two types of polymorphism.
Compile time and runtime compile time polymorphism includes what we've already learned in this course.
Function overloading and operator overloading.
We also have runtime polymorphism and that's what this section of the course will focus on.
We achieve runtime polymorphism by overriding functions and using inheritance using virtual functions
and then having base class pointers and references.
I think the best way to understand dynamic polymorphism is to use a simple example
First let's look at a non-polymorphic example that uses static binding in this case we have an account
hierarchy using public inheritance as you can see on the right side of the slide.
We'll assume that every type of account class has its own version of the withdrawal method and each
withdrawal method is different depending on the type of account.
So let's create four objects one for each type of account and call their withdraw methods when we call
account A's withdraw when we call account A's withdraw method.
It will call accounts withdraw.
This makes sense since a is an account object.
The compiler knows this and binds this method call at compile time or statically.
The same applies to objects B C and D.
In each case the compiler is binding the calls to withdraw based on the information that it has about
the objects when they were declared in the source code.
So B withdraw calls savings withdraw C withdraw calls checking withdraw and deal withdraw calls trusts
withdraw.
So far so good.
It's what we've done and what we expect.
But now let's take a look at the pointer p p is a pointer to an account object.
So P contains the address of an account object.
Now we create a trust account dynamically on the heap and assign its address to P..
Is this legal.
Sure Pekan hold the addresses of accounts and trust is an account.
The inheritance hierarchy tells us so.
So what happens when we call the withdraw method for the object pointed to by P.
Well we're using static binding by default.
So the compiler doesn't really know what type of account object is pointing to at runtime.
It doesn't really care.
All it knows is that P is pointing to an account so it will call the account withdraw method.
This is probably not what we expected.
It certainly isn't what we wanted since we want the trust object on the heap to use its own version
of withdraw.
Please be sure that you understand this simple example since it's fundamental to understanding dynamic
polymorphism.
Remember all the compiler knows is that P is a pointer to an account so it will bind the withdraw method
to the account classes withdraw method at compile time.
Let's see another problem with static binding in the same context.
In this example we have the same class hierarchy.
And let's suppose that each account class has its own version of a display method that displays account
information based on the type of account we have.
So let's create a simple C++ function called display account and it expects a reference to an account
object.
Since all our derived classes are accounts we can pass any of them into this function and this function
will call the display method for the account object passed in.
So you can see that the code creates for objects A B C and D one for each type of account and then it
calls display account and passes in each of these objects to the function.
The behavior you get from the display account function may not be what you expect but by default C++
is doing exactly what it's supposed to do.
Static binding when the compiler sees the call to A.S.C. display in the display account function it
will bind the call to accounts display so accounts display method will be called regardless of what
object was passed in in our display will only display whatever is in the account part of us.
There is a way for C++ to ask the account object being passed in.
Hey what kind of account are you.
And then depending on that we can have.
If else statements that call the appropriate display methods that's bad coding practice and it also
makes us program less abstractly.
Since then we've got to figure out what kind of object we've got and then call its functions.
There's a better way.
That's where runtime polymorphism comes in.
Let's see how this same example works with runtime or dynamic polymorphism.
Now let's see the same example using polymorphic functions.
Here we see the same account class hierarchy.
Except that this time we've opted into runtime polymorphism.
We'll see how and a few videos but notice that the withdraw methods in the class diagram are now virtual
functions.
This allows us to use runtime polymorphism when using base class pointers or references.
Let's look at the same example as before.
Notice that the four count objects A B C and D have exactly the same behavior.
Since we're not using base class pointers or references these examples are all statically bound.
Just like before but now let's look at the pointer p.
In this case when we call the withdraw method of the object pointed to by p the trust withdraw method
will be called.
That's what we want.
And that's pretty cool.
The idea of using virtual functions tells the compiler not to bind the call compile time but instead
defer the binding to runtime and at runtime a check will occur see exactly what P is pointing to and
then that object's method will be called.
In this case the trust withdraw method but see the other example again.
Now we have virtual display functions in our account class.
So whenever we use a pointer or a reference to a base class the binding is done at runtime not at compile
time.
So now we create four objects A B C and D.
Each has a different type of account.
Now when we pass these objects to the display account function the binding of a CC dot display will
take place at runtime and call the display method based on the type of object being passed in.
That's pretty cool and very very powerful.
I can now write functions methods and data structures that use pointers and references to base class
objects and I know that to correct methods will be called at runtime.
Remember that account class hierarchy we did in the last section's challenge is static binding since
we hadn't learned about dynamic polymorphism yet.
Remember all those utility functions that we wrote were all pretty much the same.
Now we could write just one version and the work with all the account types once we convert that hierarchy
to use polymorphic functions.
Fantastic.
In the next video we'll go over how we can use base class pointers in a little more detail before we
do the next video.
Let's go over here to the ID and walk through this problem.
This is same problem we had with the account class.
And what I'm doing here I'm just creating a base of a derived class to absolutely show you and walk
you through what's going on here.
I'm in the Section 16 workspace in the problem project.
So what have I got.
Well you can see here it's Can't get much simpler than this hierarchy.
I've got a base class right here and it's got one public method called Say hello that's all and all
it says is Hello I'm a base class then I've got a derived class that's derived publicly from base and
it's got the same method.
Boyd say hello.
But it says hello I'm a derived class object.
That's it.
Then I've got this function right here that I've written.
This is not a member function.
This is just a regular C++ function it's called greetings and it expects a base object by reference.
Now remember a derived is a base.
So I can pass in either a derived object or a base object to this function and this function is simply
to say greetings and then it's going to call the specific objects say hello method.
So what do we expect here.
Well the idea would be that if I have a Derived object and I pass it into this function right here I'd
say greetings and then hello I'm a derived class object but that's not what happens because we're doing
static binding.
So let's walk through this example it's really important that you understand the static binding version
before we start talking about the dynamic binding version.
Here's my main.
Let's create a base object we call it be it will simply call beat.
Say hello.
What do we expect here.
Exactly what you would think right.
Let me just scroll up just a little bit.
And I'm the compiler I'm looking in here.
There is no virtual.
We haven't really talked about virtual yet but to see the word virtual in here.
When we buy into dynamic polymorphism so the compiler sees this class hierarchy it doesn't see anything
virtual So there's not going to be any dynamic polymorphism here it knows that it needs to bind everything
statically.
And also we're not coming at this with a base pointer we have to have a base pointer.
Well talk a little bit about base pointer more in the next video.
So this is really simple for the compiler right.
B say hello.
OK which say hello method do I bind this guy right here.
How does it know wellby is a base.
That's all the compiler knows is this right here.
So that's what it's using.
And that's just going to say hello I'm a base class object and let's do the same thing before we run
it would do it again and we'll do it this time for a derived object.
So let's do that elysée say derived.
And we'll say say hello again same exact thing happens.
The compiler knows that D is a type of derived derived type is derived.
So in this case it's going to bind this method right here.
Again there's no pointers when there's no pointers and no virtual methods.
Everything is static.
So if we run this what we expect is we expect this say hello to say hi I'm a base class object and say
hello here 9:29 say Hi I'm a derived class object.
So let's run that.
And there's the output.
Hello I'm a base class object and hello on the derived class object.
Exactly as we expect.
OK so now let's run into some of the issues that we'll run into when we start using base class pointers
and references.
But we do this function first right here.
So suppose that I want to call that function remember this is a regular C++ function greetings and an
pass in the base class to it.
I can do that because B is a base and then I'm going to call it again and I'm going to pass in D.
I can do that because a derived is a base right.
That's what my inheritance hierarchy is doing for me.
So what I expect here would be for the b to say greetings Hello I'm a base and D to say greetings Hello
I'm a Dr but that's not what happens because we've got static binding going on.
So let's run this and you'll see the problem.
There you go.
You can see that right there those two greetings is right here.
There's the OP.
Greetings.
Hello I'm a base and then greetings Hello I'm a bass again even though I'm passing a derived into it.
And we know now that the reason that this is happening is a scroll up just a little bit is right.
Here's the problem we're not using dynamic polymorphism.
And as far as the compiler is concerned.
RBJ is a reference to a base that's all it knows that's all it cares about.
So right here that will always bind to base say hello and that's why we're seeing that behavior get
the same thing happens when we've got a base pointer and let's do that really quickly.
So suppose we have a point turn and we'll just call it PCR.
And in this case PCR is a pointer to a base object right.
An object of that type.
And we can say new Derived.
Now this sometimes confuses students but this makes perfect sense right because think about it sometimes
you think about the hierarchy you get all confused.
Think about what this really says this really says that BTR can hold the address of any base object.
Right.
Well derived is a base object a derived is a base.
That's what the inheritance is telling me.
So what happens here is here is Peetie are.
Here is my derived object that I'm creating on the heap.
Right.
And there's really nothing in there right now because there's no attributes or anything but this guy's
pointing here and that's OK because this is a base so that's valid.
The compilers happy about that.
But the problem comes in now when I try to call TTR say hello.
We've gotten no dynamic polymorphism no polymorphic functions.
So what's going to happen is the compiler sees TTR as a pointer to a base.
It's all it knows it's going to bind this to base.
Hello always.
So always bind that to base say hello.
And again this is probably not what we want.
We want dynamic polymorphism to figure out what I'm pointing to at runtime and call that appropriately.
So let's run this one last time and see if we get a run here.
We do.
So here we go.
Let's walk through this one more time.
Here's B.
Say hello.
Hello I'm a bass.
There's Deepcut say hello hello I'm a Dr That's all using static binding that's perfectly fine.
Now here in passing an A B and A D to this method greetings in both cases the compiler doesn't know
anything except that that's a base.
So it's binding it to say hello right here on 9:21 of the base class and then here's my pointer and
I'm calling say hello through the pointer again even though I'm pointing to a derived object the compiler
doesn't care.
This is not being deferred to runtime so the compiler is binding at right now at compile time.
OK.
This also you don't have to use raw pointers for this we haven't talked about smart pointers yet but
we will.
And suppose I include memory that's where the smart pointers live.
And I could scroll down here and I could say something like I may just close this up a little.
I could say something like stood unique pointer
and you can have a unique pointer to a base and we can call these Peacher are one and then we could
call make unique which creates that pointer and the pointer is a derived this time and we'll just empty
constructor right here.
So then to create a smart pointer this will talk about smart pointers later and then we could just say
Peachi are one and we can call the say hello method there.
Right now obviously we've got a pointer here.
So we really should free or delete that pointer just so we're we're consistent with best practices here.
We don't have to delete smart pointers that take care of themselves.
So we run this you can see that even with a smart pointer there's a regular pointer there's a smart
pointer they're both being statically bound just like you would expect.
All right so in the next video we'll talk about this base class pointer and see a little bit more about
how that works.